## Controlled Elements

Let's now learn about yet another fundamental react concept, which is controlled elements. So let's take a look what they are and how we use controlled elements when working with forms in React.

So to start, what we need to understand is that by default, these input fields like this input and also this select, they maintain their own state inside the Dom. So basically inside the HTML element itself. Now this makes it hard to read their values and it also leaves this state right here in the Dom, which for many reasons is not ideal. So in React, we usually like to keep all this state in just one central place.

So inside the React application and not inside the Dom.

And so in order to do that, we use a technique called controlled elements.

And so with this technique it is react who controls and owns the state of these input fields and no longer the Dom. So since we want to now keep this data inside the application, what that means is that we need some state, right? Because that form data of course changes over time and we also want to maintain our application in sync with it.

So in order to implement the Controlled Elements technique, we follow three steps.
👉First, we create a piece of state. So let's start with that. And we will start here with this actual input element. So with this text field right there. So that field is for the item description. And so we call it description. And then as always, the setter function is set. Description. And so then we use the use state hook. So the use state function. And then just like before when vs code shows us this autocompletion here, make sure to click here or to hit enter because that will then automatically include. So it will import this use state hook into this file. So it will automatically include this line of code. And then for some reason that didn't work in your VS code, then make sure to just write this out by hand. Now, the default value for this description can just be an empty string like this. And so now we finished the first step of this technique.

So we have our piece of state and now we use that state as a value of the input field. So we come down here to the input that we want react to control. And then we specify the value, which again, is just a normal HTML field. All right. So even in HTML, you can use value and then set it to something. So we could also do just this. All right. But now we don't want that. But instead, we want our description. Give it a save. And there we go. Let's just reload to get rid of this. Yeah. Here we get another warning and it's already telling us the third step that we need to take. But for now, let's just see what happens. If, for example, here we right now test. So you see, now our input field has the value of our state. Okay. And now for the final step. We, of course, now need to somehow connect this state with the value that we are actually going to type there. Right, because now the state will simply always stay empty, even if we type something here. So React is now controlling this element and always sets it to the description. But the description right now always stays at this empty string. And so no matter what we do right now, we cannot change this. So what we need to do is to also, on the same element, listen for the change event. So that's using the onchange prop. And then here, let's just define an inline function. And this function receives the event that was fired off. So in this case, the change event. And then here, let's just type the code and I will explain what actually is happening here. So set description E dot target. Dot value. All right. And now if we type here first, let's reload again. Now that we type here, it works. And to make this even more visual, let's come back here to our dev tools and then here in the form. We need even more space. So you see that we have our state of test. And if we write here, then notice how that state down there is updating. So we can write anything. And then basically it will get synchronized with this state that we have in our application. And so now it is in fact React that owns this state and that is controlling the state. But now back here to this line of code. So basically, whenever we type something in this field, the change event is fired off and we can react to that event here with this Onchange event handler. And so here we pass in the function and the function as always receives the event. And then on the event we read Target. And Target is basically this entire element. And then this element dot value is exactly the text that we wrote. And just to make this a bit more visual, because I know that this can be a bit tricky to understand, so I want to make sure that you get it. So let's log to the console. Also this E dot target, maybe. So as I delete now, this will fire off the change event. And so then here we get E dot target. So as I hover it, you see that target is the entire element. Indeed. So watch what happens when I set or when I log. E dot target dot value. So immediately that character that I just typed was locked here to the console. And not just the character, but actually the entire value. So now I write another one and then now we get to then test and then test. And so it is this value that each time that we write something, we set as the new state of the description. All right. So just to drive this home, each time that we type here, we set the state again. So we set it to the string that is currently in this input field which will then rerender this view. So this entire form here actually. And so then that new state of description will get placed there as the value. So we always need both the value and the change here on the input element. Let's get rid of these curly braces here. Yeah, just like this. And just to see if we actually understood this. We now need to do the exact same thing with the select element.

And if you want, you can actually pause the video and try that as a challenge now.

So did you try that? Well, if not, that's no problem at all, because we only did this once. So I understand that it's still quite fresh and maybe confusing. But anyway, we now also need to control this select input element right here. So that's going to be the quantity. So let's call that state quantity and the setter function is set quantity. And then again use state. And here the default value. We want it to be one. Let's just say five for now, just so we see the effect in the UI. Okay. So that's the first step.

Now the second step is to then define the value. And so in this moment, react then starts controlling this element. So value of quantity. Well, what was that? And you see immediately we get this five. Begin with this. It's easier to see with our dev tools. And yeah, so that's the five. But of course, if we change this now, then nothing will happen. And so the reason for that is the same as before, because this value is now coming from our quantity state. The Dom is no longer in charge of this value now. The only thing that we now have to do is to give this the ability to change itself. So to basically update the state each time that we change this value here. So that's again, using the onchange handler. And this function gets the current event. And here we now do the exact same thing. So we set. Quantity. Based on E dot target. Dot. Value. And by the way, this value is coming directly from the option. So right from here. So that's why we need to set the value here inside of each option. Just to make sure. Let's give it a save. And there we go. So you see it changed here and it also changed here. Maybe you cannot really see this as it's right at the bottom. But yeah, here is the ten. Now, what we can see immediately is that this is a string. While in the beginning when we first load the app, let's try that. We get the five but without the quotes. So now this is actually not a string, it's still a number. And that's because we set the default here as a number. But then as soon as we change this. For example, to something. Then here we get this string. And so the reason for that is that here e dot target dot value is always a string. So before we place this value into the state, let's first convert it to a number and we can do that in a few different ways. We can use the trick of using a plus, or we can be a bit more explicit. For example, using the number function. So I prefer to doing it like this, which makes the code a bit more readable. So give it a save. And now. Let's see. Yeah. Now we get a number. And of course, still when we write here, that will also update the state down here. And this was actually an excellent demo to show you how useful really these dev tools are because they allowed us to immediately spot that. We didn't have a number here but a string. And so with this we prevented a potential bug in our code. Great. So hopefully you got that. So you understood exactly how that works. So just to quickly recap, the technique of controlled elements basically consists of three steps. So we define a piece of state like this description here. Then we use that piece of state on the element that we want to control. So we basically force the element to always take the value of this state variable. And then finally, of course, we need to update that state variable and we do so here with the Onchange handler, where we then set the description to the current value of that input field. And so with this it is now this component. So basically it's react who is in charge of the state and really of the entire element. And so that's the reason why this technique is called controlled element. Great. So that should be clear now. And so let's now go ahead and just quickly use these values here. For example, we can create a new item object. So a description. Quantity. Uh, also, we have the packed state in each of these items. And by default, of course, the items should not be packed. So let's set it to false here. And then we also need an ID. Now, we could use some library here to generate that ID, but let's do it quick and dirty here. Just with Date.now. So that should just work here in this case. And then for now, we will just log it to the console. No. All right. Let's go to our console, reload all of this. And actually, let's also set it to one, which is the default that makes most sense. So let's say that we need ten. Shirts. So hit, enter and beautiful. So we got our data here from the state and it contains the description. It contains the quantity right here and then these other data that we just defined. So some random ID and also this packed state set to false. So with this, we learned how we get now this data out of the form. Now, just to finish, let's tweak our handle submit function a little bit, for example, when this happens. So when we submit the form without any item, then still this works, but the description is simply set to an empty string, which is our default here. However, we don't want this to happen, so when there is no description here, then we shouldn't even be able to submit the form. So that's simple enough. We can just add like a guard clause here. So we can say if there is no description. Then return immediately. So basically, then nothing is going to happen. And again, this is just some normal JavaScript. Nothing to do with React. So you see, nothing happens now. But if so. Then we get our object. And now finally, usually when we submit a form, then afterwards, once that submission is done, the form should go back to its initial state. So let's also do that. And for that we can simply use our setter functions, right? And so that's the beauty of React being in charge of the form, because now all we have to do is to update the state and then this enables react to automatically keep this state in sync with these form elements. So basically that's the whole idea of the controlled elements. It's to allow react to keep our component state in sync with the state of these Dom form elements. But anyway, let's now do what I just said. So setting the description back to its initial state and set the quantity also back to its initial state. So let's try that one more time. And beautiful. So that worked really, really nicely. So this form is now a lot more real world. It's back to its initial state. And then down here we get the data. But now what do we do with this data? So at some point we will want to actually render this new object here into the user interface. So right here into this packing list. Right. So how do you think we will do that? So how can we get this new state? So basically this new object that we just created into this list. And just as a reminder, this list. Well, it's even easier to see in the component tree. So we have to form and here is the list. So we want to get the data from this form into this packing list right here. So do you think that we could do that with props? Well, not really. Right. Because these are sibling components. The form is not a parent component of the packing list. And therefore, we cannot pass props from form into the packing list. Right. So because data can only flow down the tree but not up or sideways. So that was one of the important things that we learned about props. Remember that? So therefore, if we cannot use props in a simple way, we need to find another solution. And so this is where we really need to start thinking more about state and state management. But since this is so important, as a React developer, I created an entire separate section about thinking in React, and that section is up next. So what we're going to do now is to take a break in this application and finish this section with a brief summary and a challenge to consolidate our knowledge about how to use state in React. And then after that, we will come back here to this application and then we will really make it work. So then we will be able to pass data basically from the form into the list. So that's going to be a lot of fun. So make sure to finish this section and then right afterwards, let's keep going with this application.
